these values are cool they are
meaningful they are different they are
today heterodox you want to stick it to
the man you want to be heterodox you
want to be counter-cultural say you want
to get married in a heterosexual
relationship and bring kids into this
world and teach them to believe in God
and be patriotic and pledge allegiance
to the flag yeah that actually is pretty
heterodox today and so it's my job to
reawaken that spirit
[Music]
thank you
hello everyone watching and listening
today I'm speaking to author
entrepreneur and 2024 presidential
candidate Vivek ramaswamy
we discuss his ongoing campaign
the long growing hunger in the general
population for depth in political
discussion the dire need the necessity
for a renewed American Vision and how
Vivek plans to strip the Washington
administrative agencies of their
unconstitutional powers
all right Mr ramaswamy we said about
four months ago which was the last time
we talked that we would talk in about
four months and here it is I was very
interested uh after contemplating our
last conversation in staying in touch
with you
at least in part to get more insight
into what it's actually like to be on
the campaign Trail and so now you've
been hard at it how long it's going to
be how long have you actually been
campaigning now
well it was last week of February that
we began so it's been just a little bit
over four months about close to five
months right right so what have you what
have you learned
well one of the things I've learned is
actually one of the more surprising
expectations is that the political
consultant class at the start of this
campaign
had a concern about my style
that I think they still continue to have
today which is the advice they give me
is to dumb it down that this is no
longer the era of writing books as you
know I mean you've written more
prolifically than I have but the last
few years I've been in a stage of life
where I've been writing books examining
issues with depth I think the threats to
Liberty are complex and I've been
exploiting them and so what they said is
when you need to get used to the
political mindset people don't have that
kind of attention span they need to be
distilled into bullet points dumb it
down when you need to or nobody's going
to listen to you
what I have found is that I have been at
my worst when I'm doing that
and I've been at my best when I'm more
or less ignoring that advice
and that's less about me Dr Peterson
that's actually deeply encouraging about
the voter base in this country I'm
talking to voters that go beyond the
traditional Republican primary base but
everything that I'm saying here applies
to the traditional Republican primary
base as well
I think that our voters today are hungry
for death actually in a way that they
may have never been and why do I say
they may have never been
well I mean these political Consultants
are getting their conventional wisdom
from somewhere I assume it's from past
experience and not just raw stupidity I
think that they must be judging from
prior eras and at least today
you put your finger on two things that I
think are of crucial importance you know
one of the things we talked about the
last time you said that you weren't
going to have someone else write your
speeches you said you weren't going to
use a teleprompter you were going to say
what you thought now this is what I've
watched happen to a number of people
that I know quite well they get
they lack confidence in their own
ability in their own their own their own
capacity to judge the political context
and they hire political Consultants
and the political Consultants claim to
be political Consultants but my sense
with political Consultants is that
they're like money managers if they
could manage money they'd be rich and if
political Consultants knew anything
about politics they'd be running
themselves and they always do the say
the same thing they say just what you
said which is well people aren't very
bright they don't have a very long
attention span you have to dumb it down
which shows you exactly what they think
of people and it makes it does too just
exactly who they want to dumb down for
like it might be for the people but it
might be for them and it's canned advice
and then you said you know that you
found when you did that that that's when
you went astray and you fell off course
and that's what I've seen happen to the
other people I've watched do this is and
you know I don't dumb what I say down
ever and people watch it online and lots
of people say well you know I had to
listen to this two or three times and I
had to look up some of the words but I'm
pretty thrilled that I'm not being
talked down to and I learned something
and so I think I think all of that's a
lie I think it's mendacious and I also
think this is more situational that it's
a hangover from the television era
because yes television yeah right right
because you had television produced
fragmented attention because you could
only you could only get a 30 second
sound bite and you couldn't assume that
your audience was following you but
that's not true online and not true in
the podcasts so that's very interesting
that's actually a great point is that in
a certain sense it's easy to just blame
the political Consultants but they may
be playing to the medium of
communication yeah yeah absolutely so
they they produce 30 second TV ads that
is what they do literally you have to
sit in 30 seconds and the final one of
those 30 seconds has to be paid for by
you know XYZ so that is already where
they begin and even TV hits that are
unpaid ad and we haven't been doing very
much TV paid ads at all I one of the
things I'm learning is that actually is
probably certainly at this stage of the
campaign a horrendous waste of money
absolutely absolutely and it doesn't
make any sense but even the even the
three four minute TV hits
it's a bastardized form of the truth and
you know I do think especially in this
moment we live in the threats to Liberty
are complex they do not present
themselves in one bad guy and one good
guy in fact I think one of the mistakes
that the Republican Party makes and I
see this when I go to Party events in
particular you know there will be a lot
of signs that'll say
fire Biden you know and then the pledge
that the Republican party has asked
people to sign is the called the beat to
make it out of the debate stage which I
will sign as a condition for going on
the debate stage but it's called The
Beat Biden pledge
and it's so reductionist right like you
know the entire party apparatus is focus
on one man not because I have any great
feelings about this man I don't I think
he's an awful president but the deeper
point is he's barely the president it's
a managerial class that's actually
pulling the strings and we can get into
the substance of that but that gets back
to the reductionist form on TV or the
political Consultants are giving you the
advice and you see this just listen to
the other candidates in this race it's
almost as though they're that are as
they tell them to do stay on message and
that message is how we defeat Joe Biden
and the radical Biden agenda as though
these were words uttered by the same
carbon copy printer that was served up
to all of the candidates
I think it in some literal sense was the
same carbon copy that was served up to
all the candidates but then you know the
P but the good news is you might think
you know in a less optimistic version of
the world
that the politicians speaking like this
has a dumbing down effect on the people
and what I see and I think this is
encouraging certainly in the On The
Ground events that we're doing now are
these millions of people no but these
are maybe a few hundred or a big event a
few thousand people at a time and at a
small event Maybe 50.
in room fulls of that size
people aren't falling for it right their
eyes will glaze over and then the
questions I get from the Grassroots
audience base I mean they're like the
questions I get from you very different
from what I would get on cable
television on a given night of the week
and so this is deeply encouraging that I
think years I think the last decade of
the public knowing that they have been
lied to systematically lied to by the
Legacy Media I think has inculcated a
deep sense of curiosity intellectual
curiosity is skepticism you know I think
the mainstream media will now complain
that that creates conspiracy theories
many of these conspiracy theories end up
being correct some of them may not be
correct but they're still the right
Spirit of being skeptical of what you're
fed such that individual people across
this country college degree or not are
asking some of the most intelligent
questions I've heard more intelligent
questions about Central Bank digital
currencies than I will get from my
former colleagues on Wall Street more
detailed questions about the
relationship between the US and the UN
that I might then I might get in a
standard foreign policy briefing from
somebody who's been giving those
briefings for 30 years and so I think
this is actually
deeply encouraging actually to say that
you know part of the reason
as I often say right if you
if you have a people who are sheep a
government behaves like wolves well when
those people are not behaving like sheep
anymore when they're questioning what
not only their government but their
media and their political class are
feeding them
this is a unique moment and this is
where I've I've maybe I wouldn't say
shifted the messaging I've discovered
the core messaging of this campaign in
the last three to four months kind of
what was in my heart at the start I'm
now able to articulate
we live in a 1776 moment that's what I
think it's like a moment of the American
Revolution that's what I feel in the air
well the other thing that's worth
thinking about on the television front
is that you don't want to underestimate
the degree to which network TV and
Legacy Media as such is really
entertainment
and so
well that's exactly it so you know so
that it's politics is spectacle and part
of what you're being called upon
to act out as a Legacy Media politician
is the is politician as actor right you
should be playing the party politician
and and television because it's
primarily an entertainment medium
demands that but that doesn't mean that
that's what the public wants on the
political front and I think you know you
talked about this being a 1776 moment
and I know Lincoln wasn't around in 1776
but you know people used to listen to
Abraham Lincoln deliver two-hour
speeches right and they'd be standing
there in the hot sun well he was
oreating and one of the things I've also
really noticed Vivek and this is
interesting you know very few people buy
books it's a it's a luxury Market or
it's an elite Market
but the audiobook industry has exploded
and lots and lots of people listen to
long-form podcasts and I they're not
necessarily people who read but it also
looks to me and this could easily be the
case that maybe 10 or 20 times as many
people can listen to complex ideas as
can read them
and so I think so well it might be the
case we don't know right because it's a
technological Revolution these long-form
podcasts and we don't really know what
the significance of it is although we do
know that the most popular journalist in
the world and that's definitely Joe
Rogan is a long-form podcaster and his
podcast regularly run three hours so
obviously people don't have a short
attention span
you know I think that there's a couple
interesting hypotheses of what's going
on here one is there might just be a
real scientific understanding that this
is revealed which is everyone might have
I think I have you know if this is true
for everyone it's definitely going to be
true of me
maybe a low level of Dyslexia right
dyslexia might not be a just like a
condition for just a scarcity of people
that there's something about the way
that our eyes process information that's
just a little bit behind where most
people are on where their ears process
information but I think that there's
something deeper going on in our moment
and I think it's not a coincidence that
we see the rise of this podcasting form
at a moment in our history when there's
a demand for it and why is there a
demand for it
I think there is a deep hunger for
human connectivity direct
disintermediated human to human
connectivity and the reason I say I
think that's closer to the flame is that
I see an excitement Dr Peterson when I'm
going to these events I mean I was in
whatever a few days ago in Iowa in a
barn in a small town of just a couple
hundred people there were a couple
hundred people in the barn literally it
was as though everybody in the town came
to the meeting that we were having in
that barn and I think it's because we
live in a moment where people are
starved we talked about this last time
for purpose and meaning and identity but
people are also starved for a
disintermediated relationship with their
fellow citizens and human beings and so
there's something about hearing the
voice especially if it's the voice of
the person who actually wrote it right
so I think that's why the audiobooks are
more successful than the actual author
reads it it's also the case with the
podcasts that they're unscripted and so
yes I think there's there's a great
difference in listening even and this
might make this might be one of the ways
that a long-form podcast actually has an
advantage over a book you know I think
it's easier I think you can think more
deeply in a book but I also think it's
easier to deceive people because you can
craft your lies in a book but it's very
difficult to craft your lies in a
spontaneous conversation right you get
falseness of tone you get awkwardness of
body posture you can tell when people
are delivering a sound bite you know and
I think part of the reason that people
like Rogan and Lex Friedman's a good
example too Friedman is that the reason
that they're so popular is because they
are genuine the same thing is true with
Russell Brand you know I mean he's got
more of a trickster stick and he's a
comedian but of course Rogan was a
comedian too but it's and that is a form
of disintermediated interaction and I do
think that it's an it's the antithesis
of the crafted Hillary Clinton political
class message it's part of the reason
that Donald Trump was also successful
and it is something that makes itself
available to people like you and Kennedy
has been doing this very effectively too
who are using the new media pure polio
of the conservative leader in Canada has
also done a very good job of that's
direct to voter communication and I I
think your comments that the time is
calling for that because people are
tired of being manipulated by large what
gigantic Enterprises corporate or
government alike they want to see the
real thing and they want to hear it
because they can tell if it's real then
you know and and Trump definitely
capitalized on that you know he he he
didn't use the podcast format although
he used Twitter quite effectively but he
captured certainly in that 2016
yeah in 2016 he did yes and you know I
mean I think even large-scale rallies of
being there in person there's you know
in some ways I would say that if I go to
go up the chain I would say there's no
substitute for being in person live in a
room with even no screens or algorithms
in the air between us
in all with a large group of people who
are your direct consumers of your
message and that's what the part of this
campaign I'm enjoying the most next best
to that are actual unscripted long-form
conversations where you're not reading
speeches into a teleprompter it's not a
three-minute hit you know context select
the conversation we're having now and
I've invested more time in that just
because
I I hope it's certainly effective as a
campaign we'll find out that part later
but I am rejuvenated as the best version
of myself when I'm actually able to
speak truth without doing it in some
sort of artificially constrained format
then you go to actually TV hits which
are a true bastardization of of reality
and then you go to the ultimate
bastardization which is a 30-second
straight to camera TV ad which is where
most where the most money will actually
get spent on this campaign
so one of the things I've learned is I
don't yet have a
strong view on what the political Snakes
and Ladders will be on mapping a path to
Victory but actually that might just be
the path to Victory and I'm going to
stick to that and that's one of the
things I've learned in this campaign
I've reviewed the empirical literature
looking out campaign spending and its
relationship to campaign success and as
far as I can tell there's no
relationship at all
well I also think what happens is that's
especially true for incumbents by the
way there's a small effect of
advertising spending for Challengers but
it's not very big and it certainly
doesn't justify the magnitude of
spending and I think part of what's also
happened to the political consultant
class is that Democrat Republican alike
they've been in bed with the political
advertisers and the big media
corporations for like six decades and so
the political Consultants tell you to
craft your campaign in a manner that
will maximize your spending in the
Legacy Media format but there's no
evidence that that works by the way so
but that's but that's the pipeline it's
actually fascinating you say that
because maybe you've studied that
empirical literature more than I have
here's what I will tell you in the last
election cycle of a Republican primary
and then this one as well
so in 2015 around this time you can look
back at the data in the second half of
2015. how much was each candidate
spending
per percentage point they had in the
polls so for Jeb Bush and Scott Walker
and a bunch of these other guys last
time around it was millions of dollars
per percentage point in the polls
for Donald Trump it was in the tens of
thousands the thousands of dollars is
what we're talking about in terms of
paid advertising per percentage point
now we look at it this time around and I
find this
encouraging suggest to me we're on the
right track where again you look at the
candidates in this race if you count
their Super PAC dollars that are
spending money on ads millions of
dollars per percentage point in the
polls for me it's again in the tens of
thousands we're not spending boatloads
of money barely any money on on paid ads
on TV or otherwise and I think at this
stage of a race it does say something
about
you know you're on the product Market
fit regardless of whether or not you're
using the money to prop it up I do think
there will come a point as a realistic
matter at some point in this race and it
did for Trump last time around as well
it's just you know part of the part of
the pill you have to swallow is just the
sheer scale of reaching still to many
people in this country who don't access
YouTube or long long form podcasts that
still are viewing the linear medium of
television and it is does skew to be an
older voter base that yes that is going
to be there's going to be a time and
place for that in this campaign but
that's almost by the time you get there
you've already won if you're going in
the right order and so that's the way
I'm viewing this too is at some point
we're going to need the Mega Money to
probably pipe this all the way through
but I'm pushing that as far out down the
line as we can and I am more confident
than ever that actually an outsider like
me me in particular in this race can
absolutely defeat the odds and win an
election just as Donald Trump did last
time around and it says as much about
the improved pipes that we have thanks
to New Media that disintermediates
television but it says something even
deeper Dr Peterson about the people the
people can tell when they're being lied
to and I think that we live in this
moment where the government where the
media where the establishment believes
that the people can't handle the truth
it's like Jack Nicholson at the end of
the A Few Good Men right you can't
handle the truth I think the people live
in a moment today and it's the voice
that I'm representing on their behalf on
our behalf to say that you know what we
the people can handle the truth about
covid about the Nashville shooter
Manifesto about the hunter Biden laptop
story about what really happened on
January 6th about what really happened
over the course of the last year of
vaccine mandate policies we can handle
the truth sometimes it's ugly but just
give us the truth
and I think that that's something that
if a good thing has happened over the
last 10 years through the Trump
Administration and otherwise I think we
have a populace a population that was
trained on knowing that they have been
lied to which means that they are badly
starved hungry for somebody a human
being a medium Etc where they know
they're at least able to get the truth
or be able to tell the difference if
they're being lied to or not and I think
that is a powerful moment that we live
in I mean how special it is to be alive
in a moment like this it's like if
you're alive in 1775 or the spring of
1776 you'd have a lot of reasons to be
upset about a tyrannical government but
what did they do back then it was a
special time a unique time to be alive
I think we're in one of those moments
where it is actually a pretty unique
time to be alive if we're open if we're
willing to open our eyes and see it that
way
and then when you have a bunch of other
politicians who preach about the virtues
of incremental reform or I'm going to
reform X Y or Z
I almost don't use the word reform
anymore
I think the real
choice
in this election in this moment
do you want reform
or do you want
Revolution
and I stand on the side of Revolution
actually I stand on the side of the
American Revolution I'm not talking
about violence or anything like this but
I'm talking about a revolution of those
1776 ideals a Revival of the American
Revolution itself
and in some ways I'm far more optimistic
today ironically you would have thought
it might have gone the other direction I
would have thought it would have gone
the other direction I'm actually more
optimistic today than when I began in
late February than you and you and I
spoke this March
because I believe that actually we
absolutely are in a revolutionary moment
there's electricity in the air it is a
special time to be alive and if we're
able to awaken the positive instincts
that come out of that
boy do I think good things are going to
happen in the next 18 months and this
election is just going to be one of them
are you looking for an all-in-one
e-commerce platform that can help you
easily set up and grow your business
online look no further than Shopify with
Shopify you can quickly and easily build
your own online store manage your
inventory and accept payments from
customers plus Shopify offers a range of
customizable themes and templates to
choose from so you can create a
professional looking store without any
design experience it even helps
integrate with other popular tools to
help you sell across social media
marketplaces like Tick Tock Facebook and
Instagram with shopify's 24 7 support
and an extensive Business course library
that is available to support you every
step of the way Shopify is the Commerce
platform revolutionizing millions of
businesses worldwide if you're ready to
get serious about selling try Shopify
today sign up for a one dollar per month
trial period at shopify.com jbp go to
shopify.com jbp to take your business to
the next level today that's shopify.com
jbp
well obviously the fact that Kennedy's
candidacy is quite popular as well as
Trump's is an indication that that
revolutionary fervor is active because
Kennedy strikes me as as much of a bull
in the china shop on the Democrat front
As Trump was on the Republican front and
you I've been following you regularly on
Twitter and watching how you've been
being treated in the press and I want to
get back to that at some point but also
um and it's made me curious too you've
talked a fair bit about your skepticism
about let's say uh the Deep State you
know about the FBI in particular and
you've put forward some relatively
radical propositions and you just said
that you feel that there's a kind of
revolutionary fervor in the air which in
some ways is a strange thing for a
conservative to say for Republican to
say and I know you're more on the
libertarian end if I hopefully not
putting words in your mouth but what do
you think it is that you're bringing to
the table that's in that revolutionary
spirit and how do you you defend
yourself do you think against the danger
that you know radical change in and of
itself even if it's hypothetically in
the proper direction can you know can
can cause its own brand of trouble you
know doubt about fundamental
institutions and that sort of thing so
what do you think is revolutionary about
your approach and how do you think you
can protect yourself against the
potential excesses of the necessity for
for relatively radical change
I think that there are a couple of
unique attributes here for me one is it
just does take somebody who comes in as
an outsider you cannot be beholden to
the existing system one of the things
that actually constrains the
Revolutionary impulse and you could
argue whether this is good or bad or
neutral but it's just a fact is the
influence of large donors in the
Republican party there is a version of
the world in which they I mean there's a
there's an institutionalized function
that large donors play and it's to sort
of tame candidates to get them back on a
few set of accepted messages that then
become eventually the agenda they use to
govern
You could argue that there is a a
conservative function there conserving
the status quo in a way that some people
may argue is good I think I I think that
there are positives and negatives but I
think the negatives outweigh the
positives greatly in the current moment
for whatever it's good you could debate
whether this is good or bad I'm not
constrained by that I'm totally
unconstrained by that because I'm not
playing the mega Super PAC puppet game I
am independent I have put now more than
the last time that we spoke I've put
over 15 million dollars of my own
hard-earned money into this campaign and
we have 70 000 plus small dollar donors
the online fundraising is now you know
just digital small dollar fundraising is
now hit a Snowball Effect where it's
just continuing to accelerate day by day
that's what's lifting this campaign up
and so that's one of the constraints
that doesn't apply to me that much I
think was also true largely of trump
I think it takes a unique combination
though because where Trump got tripped
up with draining the swamp gutting the
Deep state is what the same members of
that managerial class told him when he
got into office they told him lies but
lies that he was forced to believe
because he didn't have independent
knowledge to know any better which is
that you can't fire civil servants
without
without running afoul of the Civil
Service protections which are these
extensive laws designed to protect
individual bureaucrats from firing by
the U.S president Trump's instincts were
in the right place I actually think he
was an excellent president in this
regard but he was not able to implement
his own agenda he was able to expose the
problem because the people around him
told him a bunch of Lies why are they
lies well my suggestion is read the law
just those Civil Service protections to
use one example among hundreds those
Civil Service protections protect
against individual employee firings
they do not apply to mass layoffs on
their own terms the law just doesn't
apply to mass layoffs Mass layoffs are
absolutely what I am bringing to the DC
bureaucracy I have said that I will lay
off over 75 percent of the federal
employee bureaucrat head count by the
end of the first term 50 by the end of
the first year and we've also already
offered unprecedented detail on exactly
how we will do it on which of the
remaining minority employees in the FBI
minority number of employees will move
to the U.S Marshals or to the drug
enforcement agency or to the financial
crimes enforcement Network which small
sliver of the US Department of Education
will move to the U.S Department of Labor
so that we neither need an FBI nor a
Department of Education and we can get
into those details but you're asking
about a question of personal attribute
and I think that the personal attribute
that really matters here
is that we need a U.S president that is
at once an outsider to that system
uncaptured unbeholden by the donor class
in the managerial class
but at the same time who has a deep
first personal bone deep understanding
of how to actually get that job done and
a deep understanding of the laws and the
constitution of this country okay that
is actually a rare combination that I'm
bringing to the table okay let me ask
you about that because that's very very
complicated so you know first of all it
is the case that in most large-scale
institutions a small number of people do
almost all the productive work right
that's the square root law okay so if
you have ten thousand employees a
hundred of them are doing half the work
now we saw a Stellar example of that in
musk's takeover of Twitter because he
dispensed with about 80 percent of the
employees and all he did was improve the
company
now musk has had extensive experience
doing that sort of thing with other
companies and he's obviously able to
separate the wheat from the chaff now
you just made the case that you would
like to do the same thing and you also
said that you had a detailed plan to do
so and so what I'm very curious about is
how is it that you are how is it that
you believe you will be able to decide
who should stay and who should go and
how is it that you've developed this
detailed plan like what sort of what
sort of analysis have you conducted that
enables you to determine what should be
shrunk and how and to know that that's
going to cause beneficial rather than
damaging consequences
so there's something we have going for
us here is that I don't have to start in
a vacuum
there is this thing we call the US
Constitution already proven time tested
to be the best operating manual for a
nation and preserving Liberty in human
history that's certainly my view
well it turns out that much of the
excess we have seen came from running a
foul of that operating document
so many of the administrative agencies
that were created were created in a
manner that Congress actually never gave
those agencies the power to wield the
power that they do the Supreme Court has
in the last two years already begun to
recognize that West Virginia versus EPA
a case where the Supreme Court held that
the epa's regulation climate-focused
regulations on the coal industry were
unconstitutional because we the people
never gave the government that Authority
and Congress in turn never gave that
authority to this three-letter agency
which nonetheless ran a foul well if
those EPA regulations are
unconstitutional then it turns out most
of the Federal Regulations today are
also unconstitutional turns out most of
the employees implementing those
regulations are actually unnecessary
so in many ways
I don't think we have to start in some
first principles
whiteboard of a vacuum and say how are
we going to design and draw this up that
would be a fatal conceit I think that
would be hubris I think designed for
failure to think that one man Elon Musk
or myself or anybody else
it's just not going to happen it's
destined for failure but if you're
following a time-tested framework for
the operating manual for this nation
built an operating manual built in the
shadow of the Declaration of
Independence the greatest mission
statement for a free Society in human
history
well then I think we actually are doing
nothing more than implementing that
which is already time tested and true
and so you know I don't want to you know
short sell myself here on I mean I have
I'm 37 years old I've built multiple
multi-billion dollar companies I do
understand that if somebody works for
you and you can't fire them that means
they don't work for you I understand
what meritocratic hiring looks like you
work for them you're you're in some ways
they're slave because you're responsible
for what they do without any authority
to change it so I understand these
principles
but it's not that experience based not
Donald Trump's not musk's not mine that
could be sufficient
to get this right at the level of the
nation
it is actually a firm understanding and
commitment to the Constitution itself
and that brings me back to that rare
combination you can't rely on your
advisors for that that is not a
substitute for saying okay I'm bringing
executive experience and then I'm going
to ask my advisors how it's done within
this legal framework and ask the lawyers
and I think that's the difference
between me and Trump and I think that'd
be the difference between me or someone
like an Elon Musk or anybody else
who would be great as a who is great as
a business Builder and is a good
alternative to the professional
political class doing this in Washington
DC but I think it requires
a deep intellectual historical
principled understanding passion for and
commitment to that Constitution to see
that through but not doing it as
somebody who's coming in as just a law
professor or a lawyer they're not going
to have the skill set to actually the
fortitude to cut and see that through
and that explains why we haven't had
leaders to that effect kit because that
is a rare combination those skill sets
aren't supposed to go together right
these are different skill sets
why did they go together in your case so
so I so I hope they do I mean yeah but
why do this why do you think they do
what what is it about your background
and and your interests that make it
reasonable for you to make the claim
that you exist at that intersection
between like legal prowess let's say and
and and and wisdom in relationship to
the Constitution and that
entrepreneurial bent what do you have on
that front that say Trump doesn't have
yeah so the first thing I'll say is I'm
not going to claim to be some Messiah
coming from on high with exactly the
prescription but what called me into
this race I mean when you and I first
started getting to know each other I you
would I would have said we were both
nuts if we were thinking about me
running for U.S president I was driving
change in the private sector I started
strive I was writing books that was my
calling so the thing that pulled me in
Dr Peterson is that I think I am
the best among the lot we have now to
actually bring that combination to the
White House at a moment where we require
it to actually reform that
administrative state to gut and bring a
revolution to that administrative state
that we need a unique combination to
actually achieve because I watched where
Trump fell short I watched where Trump
excelled above his lot and so that
pulled me in so I I will preface
everything I'm saying by saying that I'm
not going to tell you that I am some
Messiah and here I have arrived okay far
from it
but I do think I'm a product of my
experiences okay so so first of all I
had the privilege of not growing up in
money I had the privilege of actually
having to work for what I've achieved
I'm grateful for that I did not want to
be burdened as many of my peers at
places like Harvard and Yale were
burdened and I do think it's a burden by
the burden of inheritance or by the
burden of not having the space to
actually achieve and ordain for myself
what I would in my career so I I started
as a scientist I was molecular biologist
in the lab in my senior thesis all the
way through college
I ended up getting into the world of
Biotech investing the commercial side of
my brain right finding opportunity where
others would not
that led me to
really enjoy I am grateful for this more
than boastful of it just strictly
grateful that I was able to find this
opportunity to earn extraordinary
success for myself by by my mid to late
20s I was in law school simultaneously
as I was making tens of millions of
dollars as a hedge fund investor by
spotting opportunity and they said I'm
going to take this to the next level
I'm going to start an entire business on
finding opportunities to develop
medicines that others didn't and built a
multi-billion dollar company from
scratch
and I think that's different than coming
in and just managing and being appointed
Rising the managerial rank ranks of a
big Corporation sitting on a bunch of
boards and then plopping yourself into
CEO when some guy retires at the age of
70.
I built that company from scratch and so
that's one skill set
but actually it was midway through my
career at the hedge fund where I first
started that I also have this weird
native itch
to study law and political philosophy I
had been so science Centric that I
actually told my bosses at the hedge
fund I said listen I'm going to take
three years off I'm going to go to law
school I'm actually going to I'm finding
reading things in my spare time that I
would rather do in a more structured
setting
now I discovered something important
there which is if you're following your
passion good things tend to happen they
said just keep your job they gave me far
more autonomy on the job they said go
manage this portfolio yourself and do it
from New Haven if you want to I said
great we have a deal and that's what I
did
but I for me it's less that I have a
skill set more than I have had for the
last 15 years a dual passion that has
given me experiences both akin to that
of many legal academics which shows up
in several of my books which have been
quoted in appellate court opinions in
the last three years but my principal
day job has still been as an
entrepreneur building Enterprises hiring
and firing people accordingly right so
that calls me an intersection of you're
at the intersection of three relatively
unique what domains of achievement so
you one on the entrepreneurial front one
on the scientific front and one on the
legal front and so that is
you know each of those levels of
accomplishment are relatively rare and
the intersection is relatively
staggeringly rare let's say how was it
do you think and why
did your interest turn from the
scientific to the legal and what aspects
of the legal in particular compel you
and then how did that transmute into a
political interest
well I mean the political Interest
really is barely an interest at all I
feel like this is a sense of Duty that
pulled me into this political Journey
but all the way through the legal
doorstep of it
I guess I'm a person that reasons
through principles okay I think that
science is actually founded on
principles that are iteratively we hone
and we have an approximation of the
actual truth of the world but the
scientific method driven by
hypothesis-driven
testing as opposed to just purely
deductive oh I observe something and
then I decide that that's the state of
the world that's not the way the
scientific method works it's a deeply
principled understanding and
approximation of the world right you
form a hypothesis and then you test that
hypothesis you don't just sit and
deductively observe the whole time
that's actually not that's just pure
empiricism that's not the scientific
method and so there's something about
that that spoke to me and I think that
was probably why when I started my first
major business royiven which was a
scientifically founded company I mean I
personally oversaw the development of
five medicines which are FDA approved
today but the business building piece of
it was the first thing I did was with
the day one employees we sat in a room
for about six hours and came up with our
first draft of what ended up being 20
business principles right here are the
the principles on which the company
would run right value creation the
external world is a sole goal everything
that happens in these four walls is a
means to the end of what happens in the
external world you know whatever is
necessary is always possible I mean we
went went through several iterations of
that and so for me I think it's just the
way that I think and process information
and then that is I think part of what
drew me in my interest in the law and in
the ordering I Think We're a nation
deeply built
foundationally on the rule of law not
the whims of man and that's what speaks
to me about much of the US Constitution
about the United States of America
and so delving deep into what those
principles were became just a passion of
mine it was a side hobby I mean the
things I was reading in my spare time in
my mid-20s well you know I hedge fund
you know investor and then you know
before my career as an entrepreneur damn
it's kind of a weird thing for a guy to
do in his mid-20s and spend my weekends
that way but that's what helped me
discover that I have this separate
passion that Drew me then to go to Yale
for a few years but it's part of what
pulled me back even out of my business
career I ran my business in a way that
was Tethered to those business
principles I think it's part of what
allowed me to have success as an
entrepreneur but even when I felt like
okay I've developed a drug among other
things for prostate cancer now there's
this cultural cancer
that nobody else is working on there are
other people working on biological
cancer nobody was working back in 2020
on the cultural cancer that I believed I
had identified which was the mixture of
this wokism with the forces of
capitalism back in 2020 when I think
this was really still not as well
understood as it is today to say that
I'm going to step aside from my job as a
biotech CEO to focus on this cultural
cancer but against the backdrop of a
legal framework where it feels
intuitively like something's gone wrong
it's not obvious that somebody's
Prosecuting this as a legal violation
but what are the principles enshrined in
that law
that are violated by what we're actually
seeing so that's what drew me in and
then one thing you know that that led me
to the doorstep of this
you
you you you're interested in scientific
science as an investigative process and
then when you set up a business you
started to understand that you needed to
develop a set of guidelines that were
essentially enabling principles because
that's a good way of thinking about
principles or rules rather than as
restrictions as enabling principles and
that attracted your attention to the
idea of enabling principles as such you
got deeper into that particularly on the
Constitutional front that pulled you
into the legal domain and now your claim
is that you think that you can you and
your team think that you can use your
knowledge of those enabling principles
especially buttressed by your corporate
and entrepreneurial experience as a
scalpel and a tool of discriminating
judgment to to uh what would you say
recreate shrink back and re-establish
the managerial state
as something more akin to what was
envisioned in the constitution is that
is it that's the that's the gist of the
argument that's exactly right and I
think that puts me together
in a position to say
okay now let's just intuitively there's
a lot there right so let's just sort of
make this intuitive
what would George Washington and Thomas
Jefferson and John Jay and Alexander
Hamilton and James Madison say
if they were walking the modern American
terrain if they were walking around in
Washington DC on a given day what would
they say
would they be pleased would they be
proud would they be appalled I think
today in many respects they would be
appalled by what they see
and I think their intuitive
understanding that intuition is also
part of what I'm Reviving here because
they're the guys who enshrined that
intuition in the form of principles that
are in a document known as our U.S
Constitution today
and so for me I think I shared those
intuitions there's the intuitive side of
me too but my skill set is both as an
entrepreneur and as somebody who
understands principles including legal
principles and those things don't
usually go together now we haven't
talked about all the things that I'm
awful at okay by uh artistic talents or
sparse I think that there are there's
there's everybody has their strengths
and weaknesses but I do think that the
unique Coincidence of those talents is
something that it so happens this moment
calls for when we think about who we
actually need in the White House to take
us to the next level
and I think there's something
encouraging about the moment we live in
and the challenges we face it's not
Congress it's driving the administrative
State and that's where my focus is as
well because I think that's where the
skill set will be most useful
well you could see that Trump was
attractive to people because of his
entrepreneurial background and the fact
that he was an outsider and the and his
appeal to people sense that things had
developed at the managerial state level
far too far and that that needed to be
disrupted but Trump was lacking part
arguably in political experience and
potentially an administrative skill
although he had
being at the head of multiple successful
Enterprises and so obviously had some
administrative skill I think people are
attracted to DeSantis in part because he
has that toughness of temperament that's
characteristic of trump but has a better
track record in terms of administrative
ability and your claim is that you have
a you have an interesting intersection
of all those abilities right there's an
entrepreneurial ability
there's a there's an administrative
ability but then there's also that legal
depth of
in relationship to your understanding of
constitutional principles that gives you
an additional Edge so let me okay so let
me ask you something about Temptation
because that you know I've watched Lots
I think there's one more Dimension to
this there's just one more Dimension to
this that I think is important as I was
hearing you summarize this and I and I
just wanted to pause because I think it
might actually be the most important of
all
is
I do think there is a fundamental
difference between either running an
Enterprise or even running a state as a
governor
that is a requirement of certainly the
U.S president in the moment we live in
today
is I think an ability to articulate
and deeply believe
in a vision of what it means to be a
citizen of this nation so take
everything you laid out yes
I think you summarized it beautifully
but I think that that is in some ways
insufficient it's a little bit still too
small
because I think that's still like a
resume test and we all are Trump
descendants myself and you know we're in
the top three now in the Republican
National polling but the other is too I
would put in the same category
interviewing for a job with the American
public so you know I feel like I'm in a
job interview with the American public
so are the others we should treat it
that way and not take the public for
granted so that's why I'm treating this
like an interview but I think there's a
there's a third element that goes beyond
just that
descriptive and interestingly detailed
account that you and I just went through
is this more foundational ability to
articulate and believe in a vision of
where we are going
and I think this is a big difference for
me and this is a generational difference
I think Dr Peterson I think this is what
is allowing us to reach young people in
this campaign in an unprecedented way
for the Republican Party part of that
we're using podcasts but part of that is
just the message is that
young people are as you and I have
talked about last time Hungry For A
Cause hungry for direction and purpose
and what I see in the rest of the
Republican party I'm not going to speak
about the any other field here but the
Republican field
what I see is a group of people who are
habitually running from something
I am in this race to start leading us
to something
offering an actual affirmative vision of
our own and I think we badly require
that In This Moment In Our National
History so to take everything we talked
about the competence the diverse skill
set from and be enterprising to having
deep knowledge of the law on actually
the unprecedented detail we've laid out
on how to reorganize and gut the
administrative State all of that but I
think the missing
fuel that will allow me to see that
through but also revive a missing
national identity is having a clear
answer to the question of what it means
to be an American we talk about the
American Revolution what were those
ideals of the American Revolution how do
we revive them in the present
and I think we're seeing that in some
ways where look together in the
Republican debate stage one of the
requirements was 40 000 unique donors
right the former vice president of the
US just met that requirement I'm told in
the last you know 24 hours we're at over
70 000 unique donors I've never had
a political donor in my life we didn't
begin this campaign with any donor lists
but the beauty of this
is 40 of those donors our first time
ever donors to the GOP in any form and
most of them are relatively young
actually
so that says something about
one of the missing gaps when I think the
most important thing that I want to be
saying that I did for this country when
I leave office in January of 2033
that's eight years from now my older son
won't even be in high school yet
probably the most important thing I want
to say is that we revived national pride
in my two sons and their generation
and I think it does take someone
probably of a different generation I'm
the youngest person ever to run for
president in a major political party but
not just of a different generation but
of
a different generational view that we're
actually standing for an affirmative
vision of our own rather than just
tearing down the vision of the other
side and so I just wanted to pause to
say that because I think of all the
things we talked about that's probably
the most important actually
have you ever wondered why you're alive
you're alive because your mother gave
birth to you sadly this is not the story
for over 64 million babies whose lives
tragically ended in abortion that's why
preborn fights every day so that at-risk
infants will get a chance at life too
with the pressures of society telling
mothers that their babies are just a
clump of cells it's no wonder that
abortion continues at an alarming rate
once a mother meets her baby and hears
their heartbeat through ultrasound she
sees and feels that life inside of her
the majority of the time she will choose
life
when you join forces with preborn you
bring life and love to a whole new
generation which is why pre-born and you
have rescued over 28 000 babies this
year alone for just 28 dollars you can
rescue a baby any gift will help and all
gifts are tax deductible dial pound 250
and say the key word baby or visit
preborn.com Jordan all gifts are tax
deductible you will never regret saving
a child's life that's pound 250 baby or
visit preborn.com Jordan
okay well I think that's a good addition
and and I'll return to the issue of
Temptation uh via the root of Youth I
think so let's talk about that vision of
the future so this is going to be a bit
of a convoluted question because I have
to wander around a bit to answer it so
I've been involved in this Enterprise
that's established in the UK but has
roots in Australia and Europe and and
the US and Canada
um we're trying to formulate a positive
vision of the future and one of our
principles let's say our suppositions is
that if your vision of the future is
predicated on fear so it's an
apocalyptic Vision let's say and you're
using that fear as a as a means to
Garner power to yourself you're not to
be trusted and this is happening most
particularly I would say on the climate
apocalypse front and I suspect that
there are any number of existential
crises awaiting us in the future as
there always are but my sense is that if
you use any any given crisis as a as the
means of instilling a demoralizing fear
and the consequence of that is that
you're Gathering Power to yourself
you're not to be trusted as an advocate
of the people and that you should be
putting forward a positive vision and
we're trying to differentiate that and
delineate it and you know we would like
to see cheap energy we would like to see
a multi-dimensional approach to
environmental maintenance we would like
to see uh what would you say a
re-established commitment to the
fundaments of the minimal necessary
family we're not very fond of corporate
gigantism but most importantly I would
say of all those things is that
we believe that we can that people that
we can all be offered a positive vision
of the future so that we have something
to strive for that's
that's motivating and hopeful instead of
being enjoined to cower and destroy our
own Ambitions because we're something
approximating a planet destroying Force
now I know that you know the typical
young man in grade 12 now is more likely
to be conservative than liberal it's not
true of young women The Tide is turning
on the generational front and I think it
is because young people have been
force-fed so much apocalyptic Doom that
they've really had enough of it and so
you're and I see this in your tweets and
your Communications too that you're
trying to outline a positive Vision so
and you've you've laid out some of the
principles what and you talk a little
bit about the return to constitutional
principles but if you saw a renewed
America and by implication A Renewed
West what would that renewal look like
like where would we be in five years or
ten years that's different from now and
how might you move us towards that
I think it is an ordering of our society
on things that have always grounded
successful flourishing societies
throughout our human history so so the
left preys on this vacuum of identity
with race gender sexuality and then now
what you just mentioned climate it's
cereal
once the climate farce is and I do think
that much of the agenda around it is a
farce one that once that's revealed and
untenable just as when the covid-19
pandemic passed in the residual
climatism filled the void once this
farce passes and people like yourself
myself Alex Epstein and Bjorn Lumberg
and others are playing roles in exposing
this it'll be something else that fills
the void I don't know what it is but
it'll be something
now I think that what I see right now is
a lacking in a conservative movement
that becomes too
what should I say
um lazy to
satisfied complacent probably complacent
is the right word with just
criticizing that vision and the endless
hypocrisies and the nature of how
uninspiring it is and it is uninspiring
but just criticizing it is also
uninspiring and so I want us talking
more and acting more on ordering a
country a nation a society
grounded in the value of each individual
a member who is a member of a family
who is a family that is embedded in a
nation with commitments to that Nation
and yes I think a Revival of a belief
that we are one nation under God that
doesn't mean a single religion or a
single you know religious
Orthodoxy pushed from on high in fact I
think it shouldn't be so
but broadly individual family Nation God
as an affirmative alternative to race
gender sexuality and climate and I think
that that vision is not only more
innately inspiring to young people to
all people
it is grounded in truth right we have
distinct sources of our identity that we
as lost human beings we as lost human
beings who wander in that Wilderness
biblically wander in that desert
we need something to ground us and I
think that Reviving the value of the
individual through hard work and the
creation of what you create through hard
work and the ability to be proud of that
I was talking yesterday to two
entrepreneurs who are themselves already
young actually not much older than me
multi-billionaires who have are now on
their next creation I asked what
motivates you
I think he didn't have an answer other
than to say I hard work actually I
believe in hard work as an ethic and I
believe in creation that's great I said
I need to help you need to I need your
help in bottling that up and I need to
put that in the water across this
country but the value of hard work the
value of the family that there is truth
to having
a commitment to the unit of two parents
in the house with a commitment to their
children first the idea that you know
what I will take care of my family first
before I worry about the starving child
in the middle of the Congo not to say
that there's something wrong with going
and helping the starving child in the
middle of the Congo but to say that
there's an ordering I am a self that
that means something I work hard and
create something in the world and I am
proud of that and I am an individual
agent not writing some tectonic plate of
group identity but there's only ever one
you Dr Peterson there's only ever one me
there's only ever one anyone and that
there's inherent value as the
individuals the same thing I'll say is
that my first commitments are to my
family
the children who I brought into this
world the wife with whom I am raising
those children the parents who brought
me into this world those are my
commitments and then around that I have
commitments as a citizen to this nation
that I will go and visit the south side
of Chicago
or Kensington in the middle of
Philadelphia before I go take pictures
with some child in Myanmar so I can post
it on my social media account and feel
better about myself I'll get to Myanmar
later I'll get to the Congo later but
but I'm a citizen of this nation and
that that means something to me too so I
take care of myself throughout my own
hard work and dedication I take care of
my family I take care of my nation that
I'm proud of these things that I believe
that we're a nation under God and then
yes as human beings we are all equal in
the eyes of each other because in a
Christian tradition or Judea Christian
tradition you'll say we're made in the
image of God I'm raised in a Hindu
household we say it's that God resides
in each of us but whatever formulation
it is that there is a higher power and
then once we've taken care of all of
that then we can get to you know
Ethiopia or or you know South Africa or
Myanmar or wherever else one might go
but I think what we see right now is a
substitution of that if fact right
intensely worried about the climate
apocalypse or intensely worried about
some Fringe problem that doesn't affect
your own Community or your family or
your nation at home as a substitute
four the actual things that in a
time-tested way ground us as human
beings and so I'm still scratching the
surface but at least gives you a taste
you that Future No No well you know I've
been spending a lot of time assessing
the book of Exodus right and part of
what the book of Exodus does is lay out
a psychological and social alternative
to tyranny and chaos and chaos is the
desert in the Israelite sojourn and so
you can imagine two extremes of Miss
government one would be tyrannical order
and the other would be desert chaos and
the alternative that's put forward in
that book is an alternative that the
Catholics in particular have referred to
as subsidiarity and it's the notion of a
hierarchical identity that's both
individual and social and it very much
parallels what you're describing as the
essence of identity itself now you see a
craving for this on the left because the
leftists tend to
um prioritize
hedonic impulse right as sort of the
grounds of individual subjectivity and
then in response to the lack that
produces they leap to Global identity
Solutions and that would be ethnicity
race or maybe okay but what why would be
appropriate exactly the appropriate
alternative to that is I think
historically speaking the subsidiary
structure that you're laying out so you
could say well first and foremost
you're responsible for yourself you have
to take care of yourself and that's
that's a duty and an obligation but also
a source of meaning right of meaningful
stress and if you can manage that well
then you can embed yourself within a
couple and that's another place you can
derive meaning and identity and if the
two of you can organize yourselves
halfways intelligently as a mutually
sacrificial couple because you're
sacrificing your short-term impulses to
her well-being and vice versa and
counseling each other to do the same for
yourselves well then maybe you can
establish a family and that's your next
level of responsibility and then maybe a
community or a business Enterprise and
then maybe a town and then maybe a city
or a state and then maybe a nation and
then you said you know that has to be
nested under God and that is
like that's one of the pillars of
Catholic Social Doctrine one of the
three pillars that notion of
subsidiarity and I think it is the
time-tested alternative to you know top
down Tower of Babel statist centralism
and the absolute in Kuwait chaos of the
fragmented identity that we see
unfolding in the world now and I think
that's why this message of
responsibility by the way is echoing so
deeply with young people particularly
with young men because meaning is to be
found in that subsidiary hierarchy of
responsibility right and it's also
ethical and you you you implied this
it's also ethical oddly enough to focus
your attention first on what's local to
you right take care of yourself first
then take care of your wife it doesn't
mean other people aren't important but
it means that you have a hierarchy of
responsibility and that you should take
care of what's local and immediate
before you dare ordain to presume that
you're capable of doing something that's
more abstract
and I know people are absolutely right
that's absolutely right it's intuitive
it's woven into our nature as man and I
think that we are in some ways running
contrary to our nature as man which
leaves a vacuum in its wake that leaves
us lost like the Israelites were in The
Book of Exodus and I think that that's
where we are in our modern American
landscape
and so I think that there's a there's a
there's a not very practical component
of how we revive that world view I think
there's an attitude where the things
that I'm talking about individual family
Nation God
these are needless to say not novel
Concepts they sound novel to some when I
say them now to many to most
and that shows you how dislocated we are
right now from even the proper ordering
of a society you don't have to take a
judeo-christian worldview take Aristotle
is that the same thing basically you go
to the Hindu scriptures you know in in
Ancient India they say the same thing
right so this is time-tested
transnational trans-historical stuff
okay truths
now
the reality is I think that there's a
sort of
squeamishness prudishness
that make us feel in the modern American
moment like we're hearkening back to
something those are Antiquated values
they're not cool they're not the stuff
of progress I think it's a uniquely
post-modern attitude and I think one
that many especially Millennials gen Z
actually might actually come back to it
because they're so starved but
Millennials My Generation feel like that
was like not cool and certainly if
there's a boomer preaching to us as such
or a Gen X or preaching to us as such I
think that there's a reluctance almost
uh
contrarian impulse uh equal and opposite
reaction in the other direction a sort
of natural Rebellion to it
this goes back to also the special set
of attributes that I think it takes in
this unique moment to get this done
this is my responsibility to make Faith
Family patriotism hard work
to make these values cool actually for
the Next Generation
to the way we live by those values the
example that I want to set living in the
white house I'm not some
old fogy from a giant gen from a past
generation preaching how it used to be
I'm talking about this on the campaign
Trail certainly in the way that it can
be
this is a progressive Vision as I cast
it because of how far we've come
this now becomes the stuff of progress
not regress and I think that I know
that's Framing and you could just say
that's just that's just marketing but
there's some element of marketing to the
job you know to get this done human
beings have to come along there's some
element of marketing to every job yeah
and I think that's okay I don't I don't
chafe at that I accept it I embrace it
let's accept that right part of the job
of the next U.S president is to be a
successful marketer for the values as
long as you're marketing something
that's good for you that's grounded in
truth that's good for the nation there's
no shame in that but I think that as a
young person as a guy who still actually
you know this month I'm turning 38 but
as a guy who's still 37
you know I think that there's no shame
in that I am openly saying and many
young people hear me say this and that's
okay they can be in on the in on the
marketing campaign to say that yes I'm
marketing to you guys but I'm marketing
something that's true
these values are cool they are
meaningful they are different they are
today heterodox you want to stick it to
the man you want to be a hippie you want
to be heterodox you want to be
counter-cultural say you want to get
married in a heterosexual relationship
and bring kids into this world and teach
them to believe in God and be patriotic
and pledge allegiance to the flag well
that's pretty heterodox today put up the
U.S flag instead of the trans flag on in
the month of June in front of your house
yeah that actually is pretty heterodox
today and so it's my job to reawaken
that spirit and again you know you can
talk about Trump or Biden or whoever
I think there are intangibles yes we can
talk about the the differences in having
well who has the business skill set well
who has the legal skill set and these
are important discussions
but I think far more important is who is
going to be able to bring along a
generation that is starved for purpose
and meaning but running and latching on
to The Superficial fast food that the
other side is serving up as opposed to
serving up the more substantial fare in
an appetizing format that they actually
want to consume it and I think that's
something that I feel like I'm not going
to frame this in the sense that I have
the unique ability to do because then
it's just more boasting and I feel like
I've been already boasting too much in
this conversation that's not the point
it is something that I have a
responsibility to do I have a duty to do
as a member of my generation and
somebody who can do this with that comes
a duty to do it right now and that's the
sense of Duty that I feel right now
I'm extremely pleased to announce the
daily wire plus has decided to make the
16-part Exodus seminar fully and freely
available to everyone over the next four
months on YouTube we are therefore truly
Beyond pleased to invite you almost
hospitably to partake in this great
moral banquet
[Music]
so let me ask you the other question
that I that that has emerged in my mind
as we've been talking so you know
um for most of my career
I I was a popular professor and I had a
little bit of exposure on the broader
public front I worked with small
television station in Ontario and so I
had a taste of public recognition let's
say but I didn't become well known until
I was in my mid-50s you know and that's
protected me I would say to some degree
against some of the excesses that might
otherwise be associated with that you
know at a very established family and
long-term friends who were accomplished
in their own right and like a Phalanx of
people around me who could counsel me
carefully
um as my star rose so to speak now
you're a young man and you've been very
successful on multiple fronts and for a
very long time and
you you're you've garnered great wealth
you've you've had a lot of
entrepreneurial Adventures now you're
running a very public candidacy for
presidency and but you're 37 and so one
of the things we talked already about
the Temptations that you faced on the
campaign front with regard to the advice
that you were receiving from the
political class and how you withstood
that and I guess I'm curious and I think
this is probably the therapist in me
thinking about someone who's in your
situation is like
and you've provided a partial answer in
your in your understanding that you have
a responsibility all at all these levels
of social embeddedness but how do you
keep your how do you keep your ego from
running away from from you given your
the particulars of your situation in
combination with your youth like what do
you have around you that keeps your feet
on the ground you think or around you or
within you honestly it's
very practical and simple the first
thing is my family
I actually am pretty grateful to
um I I don't know that I hope you don't
mind me mentioning this but the best
piece of advice I got at the start of
this campaign was just like very
practical advice from Tucker Carlson
okay Tucker told me is this like very
practical stuff he said travel with your
family
take your bubble that you live in with
you right because you know at some point
you're gonna show up on the road and
you're just going to be floating in The
Ether and waking up in some Hotel asking
okay where am I and I'm just floating
and going through the motions you're
gonna feel like that at some point in
this campaign and here's how you protect
yourself against that whatever you have
at home just take it with you or when
you don't take it with you just make it
a rule that you want to come back and
spend as many nights at home sleeping in
your own bed as possible I came home at
11 30 last night a few nights ago it was
2 A.M when I got back from Iowa oh
actually where was it coming from that
was New Hampshire excuse me lose track
where I'm coming from but it's 2 A.M but
I still made a point to come back rather
than to sleep the night over there
because
just as a very practical Point there's
nothing philosophical about this it
grounds me I wake up that next morning
to the sound of my young son crying in
it it annoys you at first for the first
Split Second and then it's just Joy
after that which is like that's what you
wake up to in the morning and I think
that we're traveling as much as we can
as a family now now my wife has her own
version of this which I wouldn't say is
in Conflict but has some logistical
attributes that we have to balance which
is her version of also part of staying
grounded in a journey that she did not
sign up for she does not covet attention
she doesn't hide from She's I don't know
if you've ever seen her she's very
Earnest and connects with people at a
level sometimes that's even deeper than
I do with many audiences and she's not
shy about it but she doesn't covet it in
any sense certainly doesn't seek it
the thing that keeps her grounded is
in addition to our family unit which is
important to her is she made a decision
that I admire her for keeping is she's
kept her full-time job through this and
it's not a lightweight full-time job she
is a throat surgeon she literally
saves lives of people who have gone
through cancer at the Ohio you know
Cancer Center at the James hospital at
the Ohio State University people have
been through had neck cancer the
consequences of that she's a throat
surgeon the best one of the best in the
world certainly had the narrow domain
she's in she has people who fly here to
see her she keeps her operating room
schedule and so let's say I'm in Iowa on
a Friday night
there have been cases where she would
days where she will do 12 cases in the
day and still be at a dinner event where
we're both speaking in Iowa that night
and so for each of us it's I think the
prac the Practical steps actually I
think where and this is where I'm so
grateful to Tucker actually I uh I
launched the campaign actually on his
show and it was just in the Chit Chat
that we had after that that I got like
probably the best practical tip that I
have since used throughout this campaign
which is as simple as this whenever you
can just make it a rule we will travel
with our family as a family unit
whenever that is possible that is just
what we will do when that is not
possible because apoorva has to stay in
Columbus Ohio maybe I'll get one-on-one
time with Karthik she'll stay with Arjun
and when it's not possible for the kids
to come which would be too taxing for
them or they have their activities I
will make an effort and even if it's 2
am I will be back home in this house
where I'm talking to you from and maybe
I'll get an hour less sleep but I'll be
more grateful for it in the morning when
I wake up the next day well you know
that's that Harkens back that Harkens
back to this issue and the idea of
embedded responsibility that we already
discussed you know so one of the
one of the uh what would you call it
errors that the psychotherapeutic
community has foisted on the general
public and I think this is true even of
the greatest therapists is the idea that
your sanity is something that's somehow
located in you
and I don't think that's true like I
think your sanity is the harmony that's
established between your multiple levels
of Social embeddedness and so when you
abide by Carlson's advice to take your
wife and your children along with you
you're actually taking the structure of
responsibility that reminds you to be
sane along with you right and because we
all need to be tapped into
Harmony and unity and you do that not so
much some of it's abiding by your own
principles it's internal it's pure force
of will but as Carlson pointed out you
know you can wake up after a month on
the road you're kind of lost and and
suspended in space and that's also the
sort of time where a moral error of one
form or another is much more likely to
occur but if you're in constant
communication with those embedded levels
of responsibility that also keeps you on
track right in that in that conservative
manner that that is part and parcel of
secure sanity and that's another
advantage to adopting social
responsibility right is you surround
yourself with people who remind you to
be sane
yeah because I don't know about other
people but I'm not a perfect person or
or endowed with some sort of divine you
know infallibility in the in the
decisions that we make and so we just
put ourselves in a position to make the
moral decision at every step through the
structures that have it was it's not I
didn't invent this my parents
demonstrated it by example to me and I
suppose they didn't invent it it's
societies throughout human history in
our in our faith-based tradition I mean
the Hindu way of life
just as the judeo-christian way of life
puts a great premium on this institution
of the family and so I think it actually
comes down to just being that practical
about it rather than to be overly
abstract it's like
you know you and I talked about the bats
in the cave I think you know I I
certainly see us see myself all of us I
think my generation maybe all of us as
Americans as human beings today like
blind bats
lost in a cave right and the bad how
does it figure out where it is in that
cave
it sends out an echolocation signal that
bounces back off the wall and then it
comes back and it says this is where I
am so if we human beings are doing the
same thing this is my family that's true
that bounces back it says this is where
I am I believe in God I'm a citizen of
this nation those things come back and
say this is where I am
when those things disappear or they're
distant
what happens we send out these signals
and then nothing comes back
and we're back in the desert we're back
to being the Israelites in the book of
Exodus we're back to being Americans in
2023.
and and so yeah well that's part of that
problem of over emphasis on subjective
self-identity you know right this is a
big this is a terrible thing that the
radicals on the left have done to people
psychologically is to tell them you are
only what you claim to be it's like well
no that's not true you're what you've
been able to negotiate with other people
and that's a damn good thing for you too
because as you pointed out about
yourself like isolated and alone there's
no indication at all that we'd be other
than you know maximally sinful in the
direction of our greatest weakness we
need other people and part of our
identity is the ability to integrate
ourselves with other people and to use
them as signaling devices for our own
orientation as you pointed out that's a
deep psychological truth and it is
practical in the way that you describe
too right it's you distribute the
responsibility for your sanity to the
community that you take responsibility
for and that works and that's not an
internal or psychological phenomenon
that's the soap phenomenon that's a
social phenomenon and that's one thing
the conservatives knew I would say in
their conservative philosophy that the
Liberals who are hyper individualistic
Miss completely
and you know what maybe maybe those who
are Saints or the rare saintly
individuals who are rare in human
history that walk this Earth maybe they
don't need that they're in a higher
plane than people like me I think that
ordinary people people like me need that
grounding in order to have my grounding
in who I am avoid moral error as you put
it I think that's an important Insight
in all of this as well it might be why
you see instances of moral error more
often from people who do put themselves
in the position to wake up in a given
day and not know where I am or feel lost
in this aimless passage of time and so
you know I I guess I don't want to
Discount the possibility that there are
a rare few people out there who
independently could find that for
themselves without creating the
structures around them from family to
Nation to God and belief in God to
ground themselves in these things but I
certainly think that I am like most
people in that yes I'd do need it we do
need it and part of what we do is you
know this there's this old expression
where you you practice what you preach
I actually feel that what I'm doing much
of in this campaign is it's not that I'm
doing that because I'm practicing what
I'm preaching
it's the reverse I'm just actually on
this campaign preaching what I practice
and I would like to actually share that
privilege I'll use the word the p word I
would like to share that privilege
with everyone in this nation with
certainly every kid in this nation to
enjoy the ultimate privilege that I had
as a kid which is not that I grew up in
wealth I did not actually but I grew up
with two parents in the house with a
focus on education a focus on the family
unit a focus on God
now my kids they are growing up in much
greater wealth than I did but that's not
the attribute that makes the difference
we're doing our best to give them that
same privilege to parents in the house
2AM or not two parents in the house with
the focus on education on a focus on the
family unit on the phone with the focus
and a belief in God
and why if I'm aiming to leave this
country why would I want anything other
than to share that same privilege with
every other kid who's growing up in this
country as well does that mean that one
of the 25 percent of kids and it is that
high who are born into fatherless homes
or raised in fatherless homes today
don't have a shot at achieving
everything that
I have or people like me have in my life
no
No in fact if I'm speaking to one of
those kids I will say that in your
unique experience there is still sources
of strength that you will be able to
find it doesn't have to be exactly what
mine was
would we have gotten out of world would
we have won World War II if FDR didn't
have polio
I don't know actually I I just it's a
weird question to ask but but I don't
know I mean but does that mean we wish
polio upon every U.S president or every
citizen because that's how we protect
ourselves no and so both of these things
can be true at once that when you
encounter hardship you don't have to be
victimized by it you still can derive at
an individual level fortitude from it
because if it isn't the two-parent
household then it can be something else
that grounds you but that also should
stop us sort of saying oh well because
somebody else can do it or did do it
that we should wish polio in the FDR
analogy case or a single parent
household in the case of a quarter of
people in this country's case upon
everybody else no and I think that both
of those things can be true at once and
so what I'm saying here I want to be
very careful that that doesn't negate
hope or possibility for those no I think
you I think you made that I think you
made that very clear what do you what do
you think you've done or your wife has
done or both of you have done that makes
your marriage work like how long have
you been married first why do you think
your marriage could sustain the
pressures of an extended campaign and
then a potential presidency because
that's a hell of a law to ask for any
for any bond to maintain that many
Transformations why do what have you
guys done that should let's say speak to
a certain degree of confidence among the
listeners in the Integrity of the
commitments that you've made on the
family front well I would say that
the The Superficial answers we just got
very lucky the deeper answer is I think
we chose well the true answer is I think
that we were actually
we were set up by Fate I think by God to
be in
this marriage with one another I mean
there are I've never met and will never
meet somebody in my life who pushes me
and I think that that's it's the push
actually between us right it was
you know I think that a poorva she
pushes me to be the best version of
myself the the only person more
unforgiving of my failure to be the best
version of myself than me I'm I'm very
unforgiving of myself but there's one
person even more unforgiving and
unsparing and that's a poorva and I and
I returned the favor to her and I think
that that is that push
it's how do you do that without eating
each other
how do you do that without alienating
I think it is
well you know occasionally there will be
spikes of it in moments of insecure yeah
yeah yeah but but the the lack of
alienation doesn't actually come from
the without that comes from within right
so so when you have somebody who loves
you and is pushing you to be the best
version of yourself because they know
that they can expect more of you and
then you lash out at them as I on
occasion May in my weaker moments do
that is actually
an insecurity in me
and I think that my ability to at least
see that
is part of what
and she helps me see it right
understands enough of me to understand
what those moments of insecurity are to
just say okay he didn't mean what he
just said but we're going to actually
get to the bottom of this
that's actually been for us a a very
different way that might not be working
for everybody else it's not just like
two magnets that are automatically stuck
that's been the result of it it's
actually two people who are in a
constant
cooperative
struggle in pushing one another
to be the best version of ourselves and
I think that's why I would describe it I
think actually that Cooperative tension
is part of what actually keeps our
marriage and our family unit so deeply
steel level strong and I think that that
is I think Ben Shapiro Shapiro I don't
think we would have found it
Shapiro told me that the Hebrew word for
Eve means beneficial adversary and it
means optimized player it means
something like optimized player in a
challenging game
right so what is that that's the best
description of it that's the that's
exactly how it feels you you caught me
and sort of let me try to describe it I
have a feeling it's hard to capture in
words yeah yeah you just captured it in
words that is it and it just it just
actually raises another one of these
kind of conservative values that's a
little bit
um
uncouth maybe to talk about or you're
not supposed to touch Beyond The Pale to
talk about right now but it's just the
importance of
choosing who you marry
and choosing very well and almost the
responsibility that I'm grateful that
my parents apoorva's parents both
exercised in in making sure that they
were you know filtering for making sure
understanding their kid probably better
than anybody else that's something that
I think many parents abdicate today is
to say that oh he's well I think he
would find somebody more matched for him
but at least he's happy or at least
she's happy
and you're studying Exodus but I this
might be this might be more of a Genesis
example I think it's probably late in
Book of Genesis when
when Abraham sends his
servant after he has has him put his
hand under his thigh for the moment of
commitment that was just how they made
commitments back then we don't put
people's hands under their thighs now
but that was I think the biblical
version of a a solid commitment to say
go back
all the way over there to our homeland
to find
the proper spouse for
my son Isaac who's he was the son that
he was God asked him sacrifice he didn't
have to sacrifice it was important to
him to know that he went all the way
there and what if I come back him Dan
and he said I will not come you will not
come back empty-handed if you do I will
relieve you of your promise but do not
come back empty-handed and I do not want
her mayor I don't want marrying someone
you know a Canaanite or something like
this so yeah he brings back Rebecca and
I think it's just a beautiful
story of the importance of
parental some it doesn't always have to
be this way but the spirit of it at
least is if it's not apparent it's
someone close to you maybe it's a best
friend but who really cares enough about
you to say that maybe that's not the
right person and what I will tell you is
in the period that a poorva and I were
dating
um pragmatically we knew we were going
to get married but we were waiting for
her to finish medical school and by the
pragmatism of you know all of that if I
was doing it again we were just got
married sooner and just be done with it
we don't have to have a big ceremony
about it but we we started in 2011 we
got married in 2015. there wasn't one
person who cared about either of us who
would have looked and said
you know maybe you want to take a step
back and take it a little bit slower but
if people around me who know me best
they would have stepped up including
enough to including my parents and
family members and my brother and you
know my best friends
they would have stepped up and said hey
this isn't this isn't right why don't
you or you know are you sure you want to
go this fast take it slow not a single
person around me said it because they
knew it was right but I think it also
just highlights the importance of
we could say we got lucky but I think
that actually it was the
fabric around us each of us have helped
us get it right too and so I think even
the importance of who you choose in your
marriage
I mean the Bible has a lot to say about
this Hindu tradition has a lot to say
about this my parents have a lot to say
about this and
if you asked me 20 years ago I would
never be saying this right now but I
think that actually there is a role for
family members to play and it's wise
role for wise counsel it is yeah and I
enjoyed that and I and I thankfully I'm
eternally grateful that I was blessed
with the wife that I have now that was
not a product of accident it was
actually a problem why do you think why
do you think she supports your you know
it's
I've seen many couples compete with each
other and
and interfere with each other's progress
forward sometimes out of spite and
jealousy and you know hidden resentment
and bitterness and your wife appears to
be on board with your Ambitions or with
your joint Ambitions like what and you
said you know the sheet you you have a
child she has maternal responsibilities
but she's maintained this difficult
career she's obviously balancing that
with the support she's providing you for
your complex Endeavor why does she
support what you're doing
I think that it's I think that she and I
both share this in common is that we
don't view this as balance
in a certain sense if we were going to
view this as a game of balancing
competing responsibilities
no chance because I mean just think
about the Endeavor I'm on with two young
kids at home you know I've built
businesses and everything else but this
is another scale all together at the age
of 37 with a wife as a full-time surgeon
if we're playing in the game of
balancing there's no balance of this
that that ball games out I think it is
because
it is part of a shared project of asking
ourselves how do we make the most of the
short time we're given
on this Earth
right there's more to our life we agree
on this there's more to life than the
aimless passage of time
we were put here for a purpose
I think that my wife she shares a
conviction that I was put here
to pursue the purpose that I'm pursuing
now does that end in the white house I
mean we certainly hope so
not for ourselves but for our sense of
purpose but that's God's plan not ours
but she believes that I am following my
purpose just as I believe she is
following her purpose in doing what she
does today and there have been times in
our life where you know we talked about
that Cooperative tension
well that's a team sport actually it's
like when you know it's like almost an
analogy of you know Kobe Bryant right
the way he would push his fellow Los
Angeles Lakers they're still part of the
same unit and so yeah I'll give you an
example when when our first son Karthik
was born he was born in February of
2020.
we had moved to Ohio not long before
that butapura was finishing up her her
final months of training
in Colombia and Cornell Hospital New
York presbyterian's Hospital System to
be any antishes the throat surgeon she
is today
and you will remember February 2020 was
right he was born on February 23rd of
2020. that's right on the cusp of that
first wave of the pandemic in New York
City where unlike the later waves that
were catastrophized you know that was a
real wave of in New York City condensed
Manhattan's hospitals were for a matter
of months overrun in the icus included
and she has this special skill set as a
throat surgeon but she is
three weeks into giving birth you know
she could take as long of maternity
leave as she wanted she felt that this
was her Duty her colleagues were short
staffed I think one of them was maybe
was without violating any Norms or
anything gently suggesting what kind of
trouble they're going through and facing
and she just said okay it's my
obligation to go back
I'm a biotech CEO I'm running a
successful Enterprise multi-billion
dollar company
but it's 2020 circumstances of changes
we brought our first set into this world
it was the early stage where nobody
knows the first thing about this virus
and so literally in March of that year
she made the decision
she gave birth on February 23rd by
mid-march she's already made the
decision and going back in mid-march
to treat patients on the front line to
open air surgery of people who are
covered positive at that time at the
time people didn't know whether that was
a significant thing or not to be
concerned about if you have an infant
and so what did I do I was in Ohio for a
month and a half
with our newborn infant yeah the one
thing they said is it probably doesn't
affect young people badly but you don't
want an infant you don't know yet
and so you know back in March and April
of 2020 I took a step back from my
day-to-day grind as a biotech CEO to say
that you know we've got other people in
charge I'm taking a little bit of time
to
play my dad my role as a dad as a father
and I was the one you know mixing up our
you know mixing up formula or taking the
breast milk she fedexed to us and
feeding the little man that actually
gave us
a unique bonding that I don't think we
otherwise would have had if I was still
in the hustle and bustle of traveling
internationally and doing deals and
developing drugs that I'd been doing in
the two years before
but that was that moment
I think that poorva and I sat down in
December and
I couldn't have predicted to you that I
would feel this way but I felt compelled
I felt and I continued to feel that same
sense of Duty for all the reasons we
talked about earlier that I have to do
this this is what's right I think that
this is
quite possibly the purpose for which I
was put here and I cannot let this
moment pass even though we have all the
reasons in the world of the
inconveniences of this journey running
for president being the wrong thing to
do right now
this is what this is what I feel
compelled to do and
in an instant I mean she she had for us
as a unit to make sure this is the right
question for us pushed me as she does
are you sure that we shouldn't be doing
this even 20 years from now suppose even
it is your destiny and your role to be
the US president shouldn't we do when
these kids are out of the house when we
have more experience
and and we she pushed me and we pushed
each other
to make sure that we had conviction that
there's the right answer but once we
have that conviction
she's all in in the same way because
this isn't my project versus hers this
is asking the question of why we as a
unit were brought together why God each
put each of us here put us here together
to realize our purpose in the world and
does that mean that I'm then attached to
and fetishizing the result of being the
White House no I think that would
actually be the wrong way to look at
this but if I am called to do what I am
now we will be open and
open-minded and open-hearted to whether
God's plan has me in the white house
next November or next January of 2025 or
not we're not attached to that result
but I am attached to following out what
I believe is my conviction and duty but
I couldn't do it without the foundation
of a family starting with a spouse a
wife who pushes me to actually do not
more of not not less of that and view it
as some Balancing Act or trade-off but
actually further in the direction that I
already feel called to go and there's no
way I would have achieved the success I
have in my life there's no way I would
have the capacity to do what I'm doing
now were it not for that and I would
I would like to think if approval were
here she would in her own version of
success that she's had in her life the
impact she's having on the patients she
sees every day that I've played a role
in pushing her to do the same
right right all right well that's a very
thorough answer to that question and and
I guess probably the answer that you
know people would hope to hear so so
look so look we'll talk again eh and
maybe something approximating three to
four months we thought the last time we
talked that it might be good to do this
to check in every so often I thought we
were just getting warmed up
well we've got another we've got another
that's good an hour to do daily wire
behind the daily wire plus platform so
we will we will turn to that but uh we
have run 96 Minutes and amazing I
couldn't guess that yeah yeah well
that's that's that's how it's supposed
to happen if the conversation goes well
and so it's very interesting to watch
your progress through this what promises
to be the strangest and most surreal
presidential election I would say in
living memory it must really be
something to be on the front lines you
know plowing your way through this and
it'll be very interesting to see it it's
been interesting to watch your success
so far which a success that seems to be
expanding
um quite remarkably and perhaps somewhat
unexpectedly and so it'll be amazing
it'll be remarkable to watch that unfold
some that's some major drama you know I
think that's relevant too to your notion
that you shouldn't hold on too tightly
to the outcome because you actually
don't know what the right outcome should
be you know maybe this is your time for
that ultimate goal the presidency but
God only knows what you could learn
along the way if you stick to your
principles and exactly what you're only
there's absolutely no doubt that
whatever you learn along the way if you
stick to your principles is going to
serve you well in whatever might come
your way in the you know additional 60
years you have to unfold your life so I
really do hope and wish that in pray I
suppose that you're able to stick to
your principles and abide by the truth
that you swore to allow to guide you and
to stay out of the hands of the bloody
political consultants and to continue
talking directly to people and that is
what's called for now it is what people
are crying out for now and be lovely to
see someone actually do that and it
looks to me like so far you've managed
that for what it's worth for my opinion
and you know it's a hell of a thing to
be able to continue doing that in the
face of all the pressure that's going to
come your way especially as you become
more successful and more sycophants and
temptations as well as opportunities
come your way so I hope you can keep
your feet on the ground in your head in
the sky properly and it sounds like like
you have the wife that can help you do
that and the family and friends as well
so hooray for that so for everyone
watching and listening I'm going to talk
to Vivek another half an hour on the
daily wire plus platform I often do
something autobiographical on that front
but I think today I'm going to hassle
him instead because I read a New York
Times article recently which was a bit
of a hit piece and I thought it might be
entertaining and interesting to walk
through that and and uh dissect it it's
not like I'm a big fan of the New York
Times I suppose most people watching and
listening know but you know it's
interesting to take apart what it is
they're attempting to do and I'd like to
see how vivec responds to that so that's
the plan for the daily wire plus
platform in the meantime thank you all
for watching and listening and thank you
very much for agreeing to talk to me
again it's quite a privilege to be
involved even in a peripheral way in
this campaign hopefully YouTube won't
censor this podcast as they did with my
discussion with Robert Kennedy which is
100 unforgive livable but seems unlikely
yeah well you know what if they do we'll
find other ways of reaching the people
with the truth and uh and that's that's
what I admire about what you do speak
and you and I both I think speak the
truth without attachment to the result
and I think that that's actually what
keeps us tethered so thank you my man
yeah well you know that that that I
think one element of faith in the truth
is the decision and I think it's a
decision I think it's a decision of
faith that whatever happens if you speak
the truth is by definition the best
thing that could have happened now that
might not be what you planned but what
the hell do you know you know yeah
well they're certainly not infallible
they're certainly not interested yes yes
our plans are silly compared to the trip
so right exactly
yeah yeah well it's a nice it's it's
it's it's a way of finding a really Firm
Foundation you know because in a way
also of contending with your own
ignorance you know you think well I said
what I had to say and it didn't turn out
how I expected well that doesn't mean
that the consequence was erroneous it
wasn't what you expected but that
doesn't mean it's wrong that's a hard
thing to uh to understand especially
when the consequences appear somewhat
Dreadful you know because they can be
but of course the consequences of
speaking falsehood can be Dreadful and
generally are much more Dreadful right
lies lead to hell that's for sure all
right sir well
um thank you to everyone watching and
listening to the Daily wire plus folks
for making this possible to the film
crew here in Toronto and um in vivek's
location for facilitating this
flawlessly and for everyone watching and
listening your time and attention is
much appreciated thank you very much sir
thank you
[Music]